# **The bind of the burrow: space use is dominated by selection for burrow habitat over foraging habitat in an arid-adapted carnivore**

The R scripts contained in the repository support the paper by Thorley et al. (2025). 

## ABSTRACT 
Understanding habitat selection in wild vertebrates has often emphasised preferential foraging areas. However, foraging is only one of many ways animals interact with their environment, and preferences for habitat features that support resting, breeding, or safety, along with trade-offs among these needs, remain underexplored. Using a long-term dataset of movements and life history, we examine how preferences for foraging areas and burrow sites shape space use in wild Kalahari meerkats (Suricata suricatta). We find that space use is strongly anchored by burrow location, with burrows in calcareous pans and dry riverbed (“white sand”) habitat being preferred year-round and showing lower burrow switching rates. White sand areas were not preferred for foraging, however, and yielded lower foraging returns (weight gains), particularly during the dry season. As a result, meerkats faced a trade-off between optimal burrow locations and productive and foraging grounds, as indicated by faster, longer, and more costly travel when moving through or waking up in white sands. These strong effects of burrow location likely arise because meerkats do not construct their own burrows and instead rely on those made by other species. Our results highlight that limited refuge availability across the landscape can impose strong ecological constraints on animals and may restrict behavioural plasticity under environmental change, particularly if productive foraging areas shift. More broadly, our results suggest that changes in the distribution or abundance of key burrow-constructing species in desert environments may have cascading effects on the many species that depend on burrows for survival.
